From the New York Times, I'm Michael
Baro. This is the Daily.
[Music]
On Tuesday, prosecutors in Utah brought
formal charges against the man suspected
of killing Charlie Kirk. Count one,
aggravated murder, a capital offense for
intentionally or knowingly causing the
death of Charlie Kirk under
circumstance.
>> Vowed to pursue the maximum penalty
under the law.
>> I am filing a notice of intent to seek
the death penalty.
I do not take this decision lightly
>> and released a mountain of new evidence
against him. Robinson's mother explained
that over the last year or so, Robinson
had become more political
and had started to lean more to the
left. becoming more
>> today. My colleague Jack Healey on what
police have and have not uncovered about
the suspect's motives and Ken Vogle on
the emerging White House plan to use
Kirk's murder as a rationale for
cracking down on left-wing groups across
the country.
It's Wednesday, September 17th.
[Music]
Jack, we have spent the last few days
trying to understand exactly what
information police have collected
against Charlie Kirk's suspected
assassin, Tyler Robinson. And on
Tuesday, we got our official answer. So,
tell us about what we learned.
>> Quite a bit. The prosecutors in this
case put out a 10-page summary of the
charges and of the information that they
are releasing in this case that contains
an enormous amount of detail about how
they say he carried out the murder, why
he did it, and how they found him. Well,
tell us first about the new information
related to how they found this suspect
because that's something about which
there was some confusing detail in the
beginning.
>> Yeah, absolutely. There was a 33hour
manhunt scouring social media,
interviewing hundreds of witnesses that
fielded thousands of tips in the search
for Charlie Kirk's killer. But it seems
to have come down to Tyler Robinson's
mother.
>> Yeah. What we learned today from
prosecutors is that they say that on the
day after the shooting, she saw a photo
of the shooter that law enforcement had
released to the media and that was
circulating everywhere, you know, on TV,
on social media, and she recognized the
suspected shooter as her son. This is
that figure, the sort of dark clad
figure in the Converse who I think a lot
of us, you know, looked at very closely
in the day after the shooting. And so
what happened is she sees this photo,
she thinks, "This looks like Tyler." And
she calls him and asks, "Tyler, where
are you?" He told his mother that he was
homesick and that he had actually also
been homesick the day before, the day of
the shooting. According to prosecutors,
Robinson's mother is concerned by this.
She then goes to her husband and she
says she thinks the shooter looks like
Tyler and she shows him the picture and
he agrees.
>> It sounds like his mother is already
suspicious and suspicious of his
explanation.
>> Definitely. Definitely. Then Robinson's
father gets involved. Robinson's father
asks Tyler about the gun, the rifle used
in this attack because Robinson's father
believes that the gun used to kill Kirk
may be a gun that Robinson got as a
gift. And so,
>> Right. We should maybe explain that the
photos of this rifle were circulating at
that time. So, his father would have had
an image of this gun in his head.
>> Yep. Exactly. And officials also
described it and they described how it
had been found in a sort of brushy woody
area not far from the campus where
Charlie Kirk was killed up in Oram,
Utah. That's about 250 mi north of the
St. George community where Tyler
Robinson and his family lived.
>> And so what happens is Robinson's father
asks Tyler, "Show me a photo of the
rifle." And then Robinson did not
respond to his dad.
>> Wow.
>> Yeah. And so this is the start of of
what become a series of very delicate
negotiations and conversations to figure
out how to bring him in
>> from his own parents.
>> From his own parents. Yeah. Robinson
gets on the phone with his parents and
according to prosecutors, he indicates
that he is considering killing himself
and says he can't go to jail. And so the
quote is, "Robinson implied that he was
the shooter and stated that he couldn't
go to jail and just wanted to end it."
When asked why he did it, Robinson
explained, "There is too much evil and
Charlie Kirk spreads too much hate."
>> This is what he told his parents
according to these documents.
according to prosecutors. And so
Robinson's parents are able to convince
him not to kill himself. and they are
able to convince Robinson to go over to
their family house in Washington, Utah,
which is just next door to St. George.
And in the meantime, Robinson's parents
reach out to a family friend of theirs
who happens to be a retired sheriff's
deputy. And this deputy reaches out to
the local county sheriff and he breaks
the news that as this huge manhunt is
going on across Utah and and really
across the entire country, right from
Washington to the command center in
Oram, Utah to people scouring their own
social media that this deputy has just
gotten a call out of the blue from the
suspect's parents. And so the sheriff, I
spoke with him a couple of hours ago.
Huh. Yeah. The sheriff down in southern
Utah in Washington County gets this
information in a phone call from the
retired deputy and they begin talking
about how to actually get Tyler Robinson
from his parents' home into law
enforcement custody. Tyler Robinson was
apparently very concerned about getting
killed in a police shootout or ending up
the target of a massive SWAT operation
as the law enforcement net closed around
him. That's according to the sheriff. I
spoke to. And so they agreed to a very
low-key end to this standoff. I mean,
almost I don't want to say casual, but
like unbelievably quiet. The retired
deputy drove Robinson and his parents to
the sheriff's office. And Robinson was
walked in, not in handcuffs, and put
into an interview room. and they had him
wait there and and kept an eye on him as
investigators up near Salt Lake City
rushed to get on a plane and fly down to
southern Utah and figure out, you know,
what they had and if this was indeed the
suspect, the killer they had been
looking for.
>> And just to pick up the story from here,
we know from what's been made public
even before Tuesday that Robinson once
in police custody does not cooperate.
So, I'm curious what police presented in
these charging documents that further
deepens this already growing body of
evidence that he is the shooter and
really deepens our understanding of
motive, which up until now we've
understood in this very limited way to
simply be the belief by Robinson that
Kirk spewed quote hate.
>> Yeah. What we get is an explanation of
the shooting in Robinson's own words.
And these come in a really striking and
intimate text message exchange with his
roommate who was also his romantic
partner.
>> Mhm.
>> They had been living together and
officials have described the roommate as
a male who is undergoing a gender
transition to female. And that detail
about the roommate's identity and their
relationship could prove extremely
relevant to motive because Robinson's
mother had told authorities that over
the past year or so her son had become
more political, more left-leaning, and
quote more progay and trans rights
oriented.
>> So this remarkable text exchange starts
not long after the shooting when
Robinson texts his roommate and says,
"Drop what you were doing. look under my
keyboard. And when the roommate does
that, they find a note saying, quote, "I
had the opportunity to take out Charlie
Kirk, and I'm going to take it."
>> Wow. So, Robinson allegedly left this
note under his own keyboard, instructs
his roommate, his partner to go get it.
>> Exactly. And the next messages show the
roommate's utter shock and astonishment.
It's just one word, what? Followed by
just a line of question marks. You're
joking, right? I feel like it's
important to note, Michael, that the
authorities have not charged the
roommate with any crime, have said they
had no knowledge of this attack, and
that they have been cooperating fully
with investigators.
>> Mhm. And what follows is a really
remarkable exchange between Robinson and
the roommate. While Robinson is still on
the run, while authorities are just
fanning out all across Utah to try to
figure out who the shooter is,
>> the FBI is on the scene. You know,
people are still running around just
trying to absorb what happens. And
Robinson says this, "I am still okay, my
love, but I'm stuck in Orum for a little
while longer yet. Shouldn't be long
until I can come home, but I got to grab
my rifle still. Wow.
>> To be honest, I had hoped to keep this
secret till I died of old age. I am
sorry to involve you." And the roommate
is just flabbergasted. They reply, "You
weren't the one who did it, right?" And
Robinson says, "I am. I'm sorry."
>> Wow. Twice already, the roommate is
basically saying, "I I cannot comprehend
this."
>> Cannot comprehend it. I mean, and and
the roommate asks the natural question,
the one I think all of us have been
asking ever since this happened, which
is why. Robinson says, why did I do it?
Yeah, the roommate says, and here's
here's the key. I had enough of his
hatred. Referring to Charlie Kirk, some
hate can't be negotiated out. Hm. Jack,
from the outset, those around Charlie
Kirk, and here I'm speaking of people in
the White House, was motivated by some
form of left-wing ideology over Kirk's
viewpoints. And what this evidence so
far suggests is that that presupposition
may have been correct. Not that it
necessarily was the driving force, but a
suspect saying that he wanted to take
out Charlie Kirk because he spewed hate
and his views had become more outspoken
and known to his parents around LGBTQ
rights. That does seem to add up to a
more left-wing than Charlie Kirk set of
views animating what happened here
>> at this moment.
That's what the publicly available
information suggests.
I mean, the the statement that I've had
enough of this hatred is is as clear a
window into his mindset as we have
gotten so far, but there is still a lot
that we we need to understand about
this. I mean, it's a hugely important
question, and I think that there are
some strong pieces of evidence in here,
but this is a 10-page court document,
and there is still a lot of digging that
prosecutors and we as journalists need
to do to try to understand more about
his beliefs, how they evolved. Today is
just sort of day one of a very long sort
of legal process that is going to play
out over months, if not years, to try to
uncover everything that investigators
and defense attorneys possibly can about
what drove him, motivated him, his life,
his mental state. There's a lot more
that we still need to know about Tyler
Robinson and what was going on inside
his mind,
>> right? and what exactly hate meant to
him and what in his life led him to
believe that assassination was in any
world an answer to that.
>> That's right.
[Music]
>> Well, Jack, thank you very much. We
appreciate it.
>> Thanks so much.
After the break, Ken Vogle on the Trump
administration's emerging plans to
punish liberal groups that it claims
have promoted political violence,
including against Charlie Kirk.
We'll be right back.
Ken, on Monday we saw something pretty
remarkable. The vice president JD Vance
from his office in the White House host
the podcast of his late friend Charlie
Kirk. And it was remarkable not just for
the fact that the vice president of the
United States was hosting a podcast for
two hours, but also because by the end
of the podcast, Vance and his White
House colleagues started to articulate
this rationale for using the entire
federal government to dismantle
left-wing groups that they say promote
violence or celebrate it, including the
violent murder of Charlie Kirk. And then
they started to outline how they would
actually do it. So talk to us about this
podcast appearance and the plans that it
revealed.
>> Hey everybody, JD Vance here live from
my office in the White House complex and
filling in for somebody who cannot be
filled in for. But I'm going to try
>> podcast really began as a remembrance of
Charlie Kirk.
>> The last several days have been
extremely hard for our country. They've
been hard for me, hard for my family,
hard for the countless people in this
building who knew and loved Charlie
Kirk. And of course,
>> and a lot of the folks who were on it
shared their recollections of him and
how he, you know, what he meant for
their lives.
>> And so just by watching Charlie from a
distance uh was so inspiring to me as a
young conservative woman.
>> And Charlie was so great at at
connecting those dots and connecting
human beings. One of Charlie's gifts was
not talking at you, but engaging you
where you were. That's right. And
>> how he helped people in the conservative
side of the spectrum feel comfortable
articulating their views. But then the
tone of it really started to shift.
>> Of course, we have to make sure that the
killer is brought to justice. And
importantly, we have to talk about this
incredibly destructive movement of
left-wing extremism that has grown up
over the last few years. and I believe
is part of the reason why Charlie was
killed by an assassin's bullet. We're
going to talk about
>> it really quickly became an expression
of the grievances against liberal groups
that JD Vance felt was perpetuating the
type of violent rhetoric that he argued
led to Charlie Kirk's assassination. But
it wasn't just Vance who was making
these arguments. It was also other folks
from the White House, including the top
adviser, Steven Miller. and we are going
to channel all of the anger that we have
over the organized campaign that led to
this assassination to uproot and
dismantle these terrorist networks. So,
let me explain. We
>> seem to try to cast the prosecution of
these groups or at least the
administration's efforts to go after
them as kind of a perpetuation of
Charlie Kirk's legacy. The last message
that Charlie sent me was I think it was
just the day before we lost him, which
is that we need to have an organized
strategy to go after the leftwing
organizations that are promoting
violence.
>> He talked about the last message that he
received from Charlie Kirk before his
killing was urging him to go after the
left-wing organizations that are
promoting violence in this country.
And he describes the types of activity
that he's referring to.
>> The organized doxing campaigns, the
organized riots, the organized street
violence, the organized campaigns of
dehumanization, vilification,
>> you know, everything from doxing to
incitement of violence
>> messaging that's designed to trigger
incite violence and the actual organized
cells that carry out and facilitate the
violence. It is a vast domestic terror
movement. He describes it as all kind of
of a piece that it's domestic terrorism.
>> With God as my witness, we are going to
use every resource we have at the
Department of Justice, Homeland
Security, and throughout this government
to identify, disrupt, dismantle, and
destroy these networks and make America
safe again for the American people. It
will happen, and we will do it in
Charlie's name. And that led Miller to
make a really impassioned proclamation
about how he and the federal government
was going to use every resource at their
disposal to go after and disrupt and
dismantle and destroy these networks
that he says on the left are making
America unsafe.
>> St. Paul tells us in the book of
Ephesians to put on the full armor of
God. Let all of us put on that armor and
commit ourselves to that cause for which
Charlie gave his life to rebuild a
United States of America and to do it by
telling the truth.
[Music]
So when Vance and when Miller talk about
left-wing groups that are and they're
telling making America unsafe are
fermenting violence, do we have a sense
of which groups specifically they are
referring to? I think there are a number
of groups that could probably fit into
this category based on my conversations
with people around the White House or
around Trump's orbit who are talking to
them about how to pursue this. But two
organizations specifically have come up.
One of them is the Open Society
Foundations and that's George Soros's
philanthropic organization and the other
is the Ford Foundation. Now they don't
really do programming of their own. So
what seems to be at issue here is the
organizations that they fund and what
those organizations in turn are doing.
>> Well, let's explore the funding that
groups like the Ford Foundation and
Soros's Open Society Philanthropy do
that may represent the thing that Miller
and Vance are talking about here.
>> Sure. So, Open Society, for instance,
and I believe the Ford Foundation were
big funders of sort of racial justice
groups around the Black Lives Matter
movement. And so, some of those groups
clearly were involved in organizing
protests. And it is theoretically
possible that at some of the protests
where some of these groups were involved
in the organization, there may have been
vandalism or violence. And so that would
be the type of thing that it appears as
if JD Vance is trying to pin back on the
Ford Foundation or the Open Society
Foundation. But for people around the
White House, it's really about what they
think of as a broader network of liberal
nonprofit groups and firms that
administer them that they believe are
stoking violence through really extreme
rhetoric and polarization. and they
attribute to some of these groups other
seemingly disconnected acts of
vandalism. There's one example involving
vandalism of Teslas and Tesla
dealerships,
>> right? a few months back,
>> right? A few months back when Elon Musk
was working with the Trump
administration on government cost
cutting and they tried to blame this
vandalism on a large network of
nonprofit groups that was administered
by this firm, Arabella Adviserss. Elon
Musk seemed to suggest that he wanted
the government to investigate it. We
didn't really see anything happen at
that time, but you can see how this
sentiment is sort of building towards a
moment like what we're experiencing
right now. Ken, if we take this argument
at face value, is the case being made by
Steven Miller, JD Vance, folks in the
White House that left-wing violence is
the result of groups sponsoring, you
know, specific acts of protests that
turn violent or is it a more diffuse
argument that these groups fund
organizations
that speak of people like Charlie Kirk,
that speak of people like JD Vance, that
speak of people like Donald Trump in
ways that dehumanize them, that treat
the right as evil and in that sense may
promote violence.
>> I think it's largely the latter. I think
most conservatives who have like studied
this issue and actually gotten into the
weeds of the nonprofit tax filings of
these groups would admit that the sort
of more extreme groups uh the Antifas of
the world that are actually committing
the violence are not really in line to
get a big grant from George Soros's
foundations. Rather, what they are
saying is that some of the groups that
do receive grants from large
philanthropic organizations on the left
are engaging in what they would deem to
be extreme rhetoric. sort of vilifying
the opposition sometimes on issues,
sometimes personally in a way that does
give license to people who are not
necessarily even directly associated
with the groups, but are just sort of
receiving the rhetoric to act in ways
that sort of cross the line into
violence, into illegality, into
vandalism,
>> right? And to what degree do we know
whether that is true?
>> I mean, it's difficult to measure.
Certainly there are some groups uh on
the left as well as on the right that
are funded by rather deep pockets that
do engage in you know rather uh
polarizing rhetoric. I don't think that
would be a shock to anyone to learn. But
the degree to which that rhetoric is
leading directly to action I think is
not necessarily well established. So,
how do Miller and Vance propose
targeting these groups that they're
talking about and that you have been
referring to here? What does cracking
down on them look like according to the
conversations they're having so far?
>> Well, JD Vance started to suggest that
one of the things that they might look
to is the nonprofit tax status that a
lot of these groups have and that they
benefit from and potentially stripping
that tax status. He didn't get into any
of the details there, but we have
certainly heard extensive conversation
around the right, including from folks
who have briefed the White House on some
of these issues
>> about potentially targeting the tax
status of some of these large liberal
and progressive nonprofits for allegedly
engaging in political partisanship,
which they are barred by in a lot of
cases their tax status from so doing.
It's sort of the trade-off like you get
the nonprofit status and in exchange you
promise not to do these certain things
that would step over the line into
essentially being a political committee.
And so the suggestion here is that they
have crossed that line,
>> right? and that the Trump administration
could use the IRS to take away that
taxexempt status and in the process, one
imagines, kind of the financial
viability of some of these groups
because their tax exempt status is what
encourages people to give donations to
them. It's what makes a donation to the
Open Society, for example, or the Ford
Foundation taxdeductible
>> or any of the groups that those that
those large foundations fund, right?
>> Uh so, right. So the tax deduction works
on sort of both ends of it. And yes, it
is a significant advantage to these
groups and to their donors to be able to
have that. And it would be in a lot of
cases quite crippling if they were to
lose that. And some conservatives who
are advocating for for this type of
scrutiny would admit that is their goal.
Their goal is to the sort of
extra party infrastructure of the
political left in a way that would push
their donors to the sidelines and make
it harder for Democrats and liberals to
compete not just in public policy
debates but in elections.
>> And a lot of these folks on the right
feel that this type of targeting of
liberal nonprofits is not necessarily
something that they've invented. In
fact, they believe it's turnabout that
the left and Democrats did it first to
them.
>> Well, just explain that.
>> Yeah. So, this actually dates back to
something that happened under the Obama
administration when the Internal Revenue
Service targeted conservative groups and
the Tea Party movement and actually in
some cases like search for the word Tea
Party in in their IRS filings and
audited these groups in a way that was
like quite ownorous for them. some of
which were quite small and unable to
foot the legal fees necessary to stave
off these audits.
>> Right? I think I remember this now and
it caused quite an uproar on the right.
I want to even say Congress started an
investigation of this.
>> Yeah, that's right. And we should be
clear that the Obama administration did
not embrace this. In fact, they
distanced themselves from this conduct
by the IRS. and Obama himself called it
intolerable and inexcusable.
So, it's not like it was the modus
operandi of the left, but it did
certainly leave a real bad taste in the
mouths of many on the right to the point
where some even today when I'm talking
to people about this potential move by
the Trump administration against these
liberal nonprofits are still citing that
targeting of these Tea Party groups.
>> Right. And I suppose two things or three
things can be true at the same time. It
can be the fact that Republicans have
nursed this desire to go after
the progressive network of nonprofits
out of revenge for what they believe the
Obama administration did to them. It's
simultaneously very possible that this
is just an opportunity to kneecap their
rivals, just weaken them politically.
And it's simultaneously very possible
that JD Vance and Stephen Miller are
genuinely reacting to what they see as
an existential threat to their movement
and to people they care about, including
Charlie Kirk and Donald Trump himself,
who was the target of two separate
assassination attempts. They would argue
in some measure inspired by the language
and activities of the left and the
groups that we're talking about.
>> Yeah. I mean, I think all three of those
things are true. And you know, and I go
even further on on the third point and
say that they don't just think that it's
like they and their allies who are at
risk from this, but you know, the
American way of life and safety in in
the United States of America more
broadly. But it is also true that JD
Vance in particular has been talking
about the abuse by liberal nonprofit
groups of their taxexempt status and how
they're sort of using their power and
their money to reshape American society
since before he even ran for Senate. So
there you have an example of someone
sure this is this is a moment where this
is like coming to the four in a way that
is like quite personal and painful for
them and they see an opportunity but
also it's something that they in at
least JD Vance's case have been thinking
about for some time. Ken, what's been
interesting to watch since this JD Vance
podcast is elements of the right
grappling with this idea that their
government leaders may now be
essentially targeting speech. And this
really came to the four when the
attorney general Pam Bondi within the
last day or so said that she would
absolutely target hate speech. And
conservatives responded by saying what a
principle of the conservative movement
is freedom of speech and you're not
going to go after free speech. So, is it
possible that this administration may be
provoking a backlash among their own
supporters who very much treasure their
ability to say unpopular things?
Yeah. And this is where we see a little
bit of a divide between like the
tactical advantages of engaging in
politics and the principles of, you
know, in this case the conservative
movement being in favor of free speech.
It may help conservatives and
Republicans to target Democratic groups,
but it sort of cuts against their
embrace of free speech as a fundamental
principle of their movement.
And even more than that, there could be
some backlash. I talked to one
conservative who's sort of a leader in
this space and he talked about it as a
potential Pandora's box that we could
all come to regret. He said, "I don't
want the next Democratic administration
going after quote unquote hate speech."
And the suggestion is there by
Republicans. So yeah, there's both like
tactical advantage and tactical risk and
there's some philosophical inongruity.
[Music]
>> Well, Ken, thank you very much.
>> Yeah, it was a pleasure.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Tuesday, the Israeli military
launched a long-threatened ground
assault against Gaza City, saying that
it was necessary to free the remaining
Israeli hostages there and to prevent
Hamas fighters from using the city as a
staging ground for future attacks.
Gazin officials said that the operation
has already killed at least 20 people,
displaced thousands from their homes,
and set off panic in the densely
populated city.
[Music]
And
>> they said you were dead.
>> Don't make a big thing out of it.
>> No make a big thing out of it.
Robert Redford, the legendary actor and
director whose films, from Butch Cassidy
and the Sundance Kid to All the
President's Men, helped America make
sense of itself. Has died at the age of
89.
>> Bernstein, listen. It goes all the way
to Stans.
>> What are you talking about?
>> It goes all the way to Stans. He gave
the check to stands for the committee to
reelect.
>> Did he say that?
>> He said it. I've got it on my notes.
>> Jesus.
>> It's down on record. University.
>> Redford's greatest cultural impact came
in the second half of his life when he
used his wealth and star power to
nurture independent films through the
Sundance Film Festival, which he created
in the 1980s. In interviews, Redford
said that his own life experience had
compelled him to make films that
challenged the audience.
>> My memory begins with the end of the
Second World War. So I grew up with a a
lot of propaganda as a kid. There was a
lot of red, white, and blue going on,
you know, and I bought into it. And then
as time went on and I grew up and I went
out in the world, I realized that there
was a a big gray area out there where
life was much more complicated. I said,
I think I'd like to make films that are
about that that that gray zone. which
eventually led to the reason one of the
reasons for starting Sundance was to
give opportunities for others.
>> Today's episode was produced by OA
Cherved Mooj Zadei and Ricky Nveski with
help from Michael Simon Johnson. It was
edited by Devon Taylor with help from
Michael Benois and was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Michael
Boro.
See you tomorrow.